I think nobody will believe just how
stupid this is if I don't directly quote
the text so let's begin by directly
quoting John Stuart Mill quote if I am
asked what I mean by a difference of
quality and pleasures or what makes one
pleasure more valuable in another merely
as a pleasure
except it's being greater in amount
there is but one possible answer of two
pleasures if there be one to which all
or most who have experience of both give
a decided preference irrespective of any
feeling of moral obligation to prefer it
that is the more desirable pleasure
let's pause to reflect on how absurd how
abhorred in rule a society along the
lines of this philosophy if we were to
believe that society should be reshaped
to serve the greatest happiness of the
greatest number of people and this is
our definition of happiness so should
the government encourage people to eat
cheese or not should they eat cheese or
should they quit eating cheese and eat a
vegan diet well apparently the greatest
happiness the greatest number of people
is is shown because people love eating
cheese the vast majority the vast repeal
have tried both lifestyles prefer eating
cheese fact that it's unhealthy
doesn't matter greatest happiness of the
greatest number of people through a
simple appeal to popularity fallacy
that's all there is to it so should
people eat doughnuts deep fried dessert
products like doughnuts or should they
eat a meager diet of boiled vegetables
as recommended by the Physicians
Committee for Responsible medicine crude
appeal to popularity should the
government encouraged people to gamble
or should they discourage gambling
should gambling perhaps be made illegal
would we have a happier society this is
all about happiness would we have a
happier society with no gambling in it
as opposed to say every major city in
the United States encouraging gambling
the way that Las Vegas Nevada does guess
what guys the polling data is in the
vast majority of people enjoy gambling a
lot more than they enjoy the study of
political philosophy I want to say very
briefly if you listen to people who are
former members of cults reflecting on
their lives they very often say that
when they first joined the cult when
they first joined a charismatic
religious group whatever it was that
they had misgivings they could tell that
some of the things they were reading and
some of the philosophical principles
they were hearing really didn't make
sense but they pushed that doubt aside
and they told themselves they have to
believe in this they have to make it
make sense they have to rationalize this
to themselves and then later they look
back and they say I wish I I wish I'd
paid more attention to my own misgivings
all right for me even as a child the
fundamental absurdity of utilitarianism
the idea of ruling greatest happiness
the greatest number of people the idea
of defining happiness through this
pleasure pain calculus appeal to this
appeal the popularity whatever is the
most popular enjoyment is the
objectively real enjoyment okay the
problems of this the profound
incoherence in this was obvious to me
even as a chef now I'm heterosexual okay
and within heterosexual males my taste
in women is not that uncommon okay there
are some heterosexual men who prefer
really fat women not me okay how does
this make sense to them you read this oh
well some guys some guys like slender
fit women and some guys like fat women
oh yeah well but you know objectively
it's just ridiculous it's just
ridiculous to pretend there's something
objective living how do you think gay
people feel reading this okay homosexual
people read this and they say oh well um
if objectively the majority of people
the great majority of people who have
experience of both pleasures would
choose one of the via the great majority
of people are heterosexual that's
completely meaningless to you if you
personally are gay right if for you
personally one kind of sex would be
misery and another would be pleasure
that's all there is to it there's no way
we can find a foothold to make pleasure
objectively real outside of the merely
subjective reality of desire what does
water taste like when you're thirsty and
especially if you're suffering from
thirst outdoors in the heat and you're
uncertain of where or how you're gonna
find drinking water if you've ever been
in those circumstances the way that
water tastes when you're desperate for a
sip of water
is unbelievably delicious and if you're
already full and satiated and relaxing
and sitting in an air-conditioned room
and you're not particularly thirsty then
the taste of water
seems like nothing at all the difference
between a beautiful woman and an ugly
woman is in the eye of the beholder it's
subjective it's relative to me and my
desire whether you find women attractive
or men attractive is subjective it's
relative to the perceiver it's relative
to human desire and that is all there is
to it what we desire subjectively seems
to us with the most real thing in the
world but of course it's the least real
whether eating a doughnut is delicious
or disgusting depends on you
and your cognition and your desire
whether eating french fries from
McDonald's deep fried saturated with oil
french fries is delicious or disgusting
is relative to you and guess what the
good news is the way you experience the
world what seems to be pleasant and
unpleasant it can change with knowledge
it can knowing changes feeling feeling
changes desiring I find french fries
disgusting and it's partly because I
know what they are I know what they're
made up I feel revolted eating french
fries I eat a very spare vegan diet to
eat a lot of broccoli eat a lot of peas
lately frozen peas I mean okay however I
do not share this utilitarian delusion
that what I find Pleasant is objectively
real and I know that if I were stupid
enough to subscribe to this appeal to
popularity fallacy I'm over only further
marginalizing myself because then I'd be
recognizing what the majority of people
consider to be pleasure to be the
objectively real pleasure and all of my
health of all the things I'm committed
to whether it's caring about philosophy
or humanitarian work or caring about
animal rights then all of those things
become unreal they become subordinated
relative to this ridiculous hierarchy of
the pleasure pain calculus however John
Stuart Mill himself was of course a snob
John Stuart Mill had a lot more in
common with me that he had in common
with the average man who enjoys gambling
and smoking cigars and eating deep fried
doughnuts John Stuart Mill like myself
was somebody who would enjoy reading
Aristotle and Plato so of course he
cannot let his philosophy stand on this
one leg alone the most famous part of it
the greatest happiness for the greatest
number people know
immediately after this quotation he then
presses on to say that of course he
believes in a distinction between higher
and lower pleasures
and for this argument there is
absolutely no basis whatsoever except
bias prejudice cultural familiarity
ultimately a religious mentality this is
simply the founding of a new religion it
is appealing to your sense of faith and
belief now if you don't think this is
culturally relative what is a higher
pleasure and what is a lower pleasure
imagine how different this would sound
to someone who grew up Muslim in a
Muslim majority culture in that culture
they have a very clear sense of what are
the higher pleasures what are the
refined pleasures what are the pleasures
a refined gentleman would enjoy an
indulgent and what are the lower and
despicable pleasures think about a
stereotypical Parisian Frenchman someone
from Paris France who grew up in that
culture with a sort of mixture of
Christian and atheist background what
they think are the refined pleasures all
right both of those groups I utterly
revile the things they consider most
pleasant ok people who grow up in Paris
France
they think that drinking red wine and
eating steak tartare and trying to
seduce the woman who they're employing
as an au pair or to take care of their
daughter as the highest pleasure ok
let's let's be real sorry I've spent a
lot of time in France
alcohol meat and cheating on your wife
with younger women these are like the
dominant refined pleasures of French
society you know even the stuff that's
on French public television and radio
the sitting around in a reading of what
they consider literature what they
consider high literature in France I
despise all of that stuff also ok that's
me subjectively ok but there is no way
anyone can sit and come to this
ridiculous utilitarian judgment at all
in French culture their idea of what are
the high pleasures the refined pleasures
those are correct whereas in a Muslim
society their idea of the high
the high pleasure is the higher more
refined jokes that's incorrect
there's no way you can come to the
judgement that what Japanese people or
Tibetan people think is high or think is
low in the sense of high and low is
correct or very there is absolutely no
objective reality to this discourse
whatsoever whereas the first premise the
first leg at least you could measure
that you could go out and ask people you
can poll people you can just you know
measure the economic reality of it what
percentage of people enjoy gambling what
percentage of people think gambling is a
better use of their time food money to
reading philosophy or reading about
politics even okay we know gambling is
really popular there's something in
human nature that enjoys gambling but I
for my part if my own son were spending
twenty percent of his money every year
gambling if I had a son who grew up and
he went to Las Vegas Nevada every three
months or six months or something there
are a lot of people that have a regular
vacation schedule going to Las Vegas
Nevada I would say to him look this is
bad and depraved and wrong and I'm aware
I'm aware that the gamblers the people
enjoy gamblers they outnumber me they
maybe the vast majority or they maybe
the plurality gambling is popular people
who truly believe and experience
gambling as pleasant they outnumber the
people like me
ten to one or a hundred or one and I'm
in the position of saying against the
utilitarians no that doesn't mean that
they're right wrong I can't accept this
this is ridiculous and again if you're a
homosexual addition to the way you can
say like just from a sincere subjective
perspective there's no way you can say
that heterosexuality is right and
homosexuality is wrong these things are
radically subjective they're reciprocal
with desire in the same sense that a
shadow is reciprocal with its source of
light you turn off the light bulb you
lose the shadow
. period one is not more real than the
other in comparing one shadow to the
other it's not convenient for me to look
at gambling this way and recognize you
know what it's a really difficult
aesthetic
ethical and political argument for me to
argue that gambling should be illegal
when you live in a culture where
gambling is celebrated as normal all
right and then of course from the other
side look at an Islamic majority culture
in an Islamic majority culture they
really look down on gambling as being a
very low pleasure SP very despicable
something a refined and educated
gentleman would not do so this is all
that utilitarianism comes down to is
authoritarianism
it's just John Stuart Mill saying that
from his perspective some pleasures are
truly human are truly suitable for
refined sophisticated humanity and he's
going to decide what those are and then
he's going to force everyone through
education or coercion or legislation to
agree with his hierarchy of the
pleasures and that is absolutely no
better than Catholicism or Islam or an
authoritarian form of Buddhism like
Tibetan Buddhism there's someone in
charge who's a religious leader or a
shaman who decides what is pleasant and
unpleasant and they've written up the
so-called calculus and they now rural
society in the pursuit of the so-called
greatest happiness of the greatest
number of people but it's not it's not
the greatest happiness the greatest
number of people it is one ideological
religious leaders idea of the greatest
happiness of the greatest number people
they believe on a religious level they
believe it is in your best interest for
you to study the philosophy of Socrates
Plato Aristotle the great names from
ancient Greece right how does that sound
to a Japanese person you think that's an
objectively real pleasure pain calculus
for what you think that's you think
that's an objectively real measure of
utility you think there's social utility
in forcing children to study the
philosophy of of ancient Athens you
don't think that sounds a little bit
strange to someone who's born and raised
in Beijing China born and raised in
Tokyo Japan
born and raised in India how about the
people who are conquered by European
imperialism how about someone who is
ethnically mohawk or a jib way or Cree
or den a or Navajo okay so you conquered
them you destroyed this site linear sum
hey guess what guys it's objectively
real that your culture and your religion
and your philosophical heritage is
worthless and here's here's the up here
here's the utility for your for your
happiness in order to make you more
happy as an individual in order to make
society more happy in aggregate for
everyone's greatest happiness we're
gonna force you to read Socrates Plato
Xenophon Aristotle right that's the true
philosophy okay
that's not oh yeah right that's not a
culturally relative concert well that's
not just our bias or our prejudice
because that's who we happen to be how
do you think a Muslim leader would
regard these philosophies don't you
think a Muslim King or monarch would
have a different idea of what philosophy
would be in society's interest to force
everyone to study they did it for
centuries the Catholics did it for
centuries all these different
authoritarian societies including China
I mean with China it was a relatively
small elite who were forced to read the
tomes of philosophy that define the
society but it was a tremendously
influential anyone who wanted a position
in government even a very lowly position
like a clerk or a scribe or all of the
bureaucrats in China they all had to
read the same stack of books is this
long list of philosophical tomes they
had to read and some of them they were
expected to almost have memorized okay
and they felt that reading that
literature reading that philosophy and a
lot of its political those discussions
of political examples legal and moral
examples they felt that that was
integral to developing yourself into a
sophisticated gentleman who was capable
of doing the business of state of
participating in a rustic Radek life in
courtly life so gee what why is it why
is it the people in Italy just never
developed a an appreciation for the
philosophy of Lord Shang
that nobody nobody in Europe is
interested in the Han Dynasty critique
of the advantages and disadvantages of
the rule of Qin Shihuang well what do
you why do you think that is why is it
that a book like the Han fascia is not
regarded in Europe as being objectively
for your greater happiness for the
utility of sizeable for us to force you
to read the same way it was in in China
do you not see how profoundly stupid
self-serving and ridiculous this is that
this whole argument relies on the
fantasy of having a philosopher-king
force everyone to agree with his
subjective notion of what is truly
pleasure and what is truly pain of what
is truly in your best interest what is
truly going to lead to your happiness
and to the greatest happiness of society
as a whole the utilitarian philosophy is
a secular robe draped over a
fundamentally religious authoritarian
and dogmatic corpse
[Music]